# Basic Spell Lists

  
### Magic User

##### 2nd Level

- Phantasmal Force
- Pyrotechnics
- Strength
- Web
- Wizard Lock

  
##### 3rd Level

- Clairaudience
- Clairvoyance
- Darkvision
- Dispel Magic
- Explosive Runes
- Fireball
- Fly
- Haste
- Hold Person
- Invisibility, 10-foot Radius
- Lightning Bolt
- Monster Summoning I
- Protection from Evil, 10-foot Radius
- Protection from Normal Missiles
- Rope Trick
- Slow
- Suggestion
- Water Breathing

  ### Cleric


  ##### Level 1



- Holy Smite
- Light
- Protection from Evil
- Purify Food and Drink
- Remove Fear


##### Level 2

- Chant
- Hold Door
- Resist Fire
- Silence, 15-foot Radius
- Speak with Animals

  


##### Level 3

- Cure Blindness
- Cure Disease
- Locate object
- Remove Curse
- Speak with Dead



### Highland Shaman


##### Cantrips (0 MD)

- Speak From Beyond


##### 1st Level

- Create Pit
- Detect Magic
- Faerie Fire
- Locate Animals
- Predict Weather
- Purify Food and Drink
- Resist Fire

  

##### 2nd Level

- Barkskin
- Create Water
- Cure Light Wounds
- Heat Metal
- Locate Plants
- Obscuring Mist
- Produce Flame
- Speak with Animals
- Warp Wood

  

##### Level 3

- Call Lightning
- Hold Animal
- Neutralize Poison
- Plant Growth (needs description)
- Protection from Fire (needs description)
- Pyrotechnics
- Water Breathing


## Spell Descriptions


  

### Cantrips

  

  



  

#### Speak From Beyond [Cantrip]

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, Cantrip

- **Range:**  Any distance

- **Casting time:** 10 minutes

- **Duration:**  Concentration

___

Communicate with a known, specific ally (one way only) while concentration is maintained, across any distance.

  

\column

  

### Level 1

  



  
  

#### Create Pit

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 1st Level

- **Range:** Touch

- **Duration:** 1 hour/[MD]

___

A pit [sum MD]’ deep and 10’ in diameter appears at the point you touch. The sides are smooth and difficult to climb. Anything in the pit when the duration expires is summarily disgorged.

  
  



  
  

  



  


  
  

#### Detect Magic

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, Cleric; Magic-User, 1st Level

- **Range:** 60 ft x [MD]

- **Duration:**  20 minutes

___

The caster can perceive, in places, people, or things, the presence of

a magical spell or enchantment. For example, magical items may be

discovered in this fashion, as can the presence of a charm secretly laid

upon a person.

  

\column

  

#### Faerie Fire

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 1st Level

- **Range:** 60 ft

- **Duration:**  1 hour

- **Quick:** If cast with 2 [MD], can be cast immediately during the Declare Spells phase of combat.

___

This spell illuminates an object or creature with an eerie, fey glow. The spell’s target may be approximately as large as 10 square feet plus 2 square feet per level of the caster. The spell can be used for diverse purposes, such as revealing the true dimensions or extent of a thing, or to prevent a creature from retreating into the darkness. Usually such illumination to renders a creature more easily hit, granting a +1 to-hit bonus to attackers.

  

#### Hold Door

___

- **Spell Level:** Magic-User, 1st Level

- **Range:** 120 ft

- **Duration:**  2d6 + [MD sum] turns

___

This spell holds a door closed for the spell’s duration or until dispelled.

Creatures with magic resistance can shatter the spell without effort.

  
  


  



  
  

#### Locate Animals

___

- **Spell Level:**  Shaman, 1st Level

- **Range:**  60 feet + 10 feet/[MD]

- **Duration:** 2 turn x [MD]

___

Within the spell’s range, the caster perceives the correct direction (as the crow flies) toward a particular kind of animal named in the casting of the spell.

  



  

\column

  

#### Magic Missile [Ella’s Constellation]

___

- **Spell Level:** Magic-User, 1st Level

- **Range:** 150 ft

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

Roll 1d4 for each [MD]. This many tiny star-shaped magic missiles appear above the battlefield that may be directed to targets however the caster chooses. Each missile hits automatically and does 1HP of damage. For every odd-level (not counting 1st) of the caster, add a d4 to the initial roll. For example, a level 3 Magic-User would add 1 extra d4.

  
  

#### Middergloom Missiles

___

- **Spell Level:** Magic-User, 1st Level

- **Range:** 150 ft

- **Duration:** Immediate, but dissipates after a number of rounds equal to [caster level] + [MD]

___

Bright green, ethereal balls of energy appear at the casters

fingertips. A single missile is generated

for each [MD]. These can be thrown all at once, or as

many per round as the caster desires until

they dissipate. The caster must roll to hit (+ INT)

for each missile. Successful hits score 1d6 [exploding]

damage, with no saving throw.

  
  

#### Predict Weather

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 1st Level

- **Range:** Centered on caster

- **Duration:** Immediate

  

---

The Shaman silently drinks in knowledge from the surrounding area, becoming attuned to the patterns of air, wind, earth and fire. Within moments, the character

can predict what the weather conditions will be for the next 12 hours in the immediate vicinity (2 square miles/[MD]). As with most forecasts of weather, conditions may change unexpectedly, giving rise to a 5% chance that the Shaman's prediction will, ultimately, prove to be incorrect.

  

{{pageNumber,auto}}


  
  

#### Purify Food and Drink

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman; Cleric, 1st Level

- **Range:** Close/Touch (Referee’s discretion)

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

Enough food and water for up to a dozen people is made pure, removing spoilage and poisons.

  
#### Remove Fear

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 1st

- **Range:** Touch

- **Duration:** 1 turn x [MD]

___

This spell is a divine warding against fear, and it can also

banish magical terror in someone already affected. In the

latter case, the spell grants a second saving throw at a

bonus of +1/MD. To a person not already affected by magical fear, the spell grants a bonus of +4 to

fear saving throws for 1 turn/[MD]

  

\column

  
  



  
  



  

{{pageNumber,auto}}

\page

  

### Level 2

  

#### Aphasia

___

- **Spell Level:** Magic-User, 2nd Level

- **Range:** 120 ft

- **Duration:** [MD] minutes

- **Save:** Yes

___

Target saves with penalty equal to [dice]. On failure, they cannot speak or comprehend any language, written or spoken, for the duration.

  
  

#### Barksin

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:** Touch

- **Duration:** [sum MD] rounds

___

The barkskin spell magically toughens a creature’s skin, making it as strong as tree bark. The recipient of the spell improves his or her armour class by one point and also gains a +1 bonus on all saving throws.

  
  

#### Chant

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 2nd Level

- **Range:** 30 ft radius centered on caster

- **Duration:** Concentration

- **Quick:** If cast with 2 [MD], can be cast immediately during the Declare Spells phase of combat.

___

Once the spell is cast, the cleric must maintain a sonorous

chanting of holy words and prayers, which not only lend

divine favor to the cleric and his or her allies but also bring

disfavor to their foes. For so long as the cleric continues to chant, his or her allies (within the

area of effect) gain a bonus of +1 to all attack rolls, damage

rolls, and saving throws. Enemies within the spell’s area

of effect also suffer a –1 to all such die rolls. If the cleric

breaks concentration, the effect of the spell will end. Moving quicker than half-speed or being silenced automatically breaks concentration.

  

\column

  

#### Create Water

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 2nd Level; Cleric 4th Level

- **Range:** Close

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

This spell creates a one-day supply of drinking water for 12 people/[MD].

  



  
  



  
  

#### Heat Metal

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:** 30 ft

- **Duration:**  1d6 rounds

___

Metal object becomes unbearably hot. A 1-handed weapon can be affected; a 2-handed weapon with at least 2 dice; a suit of human-sized armour with at least 4 dice. A wearer/wielder takes 1d6 points of damage per round in contact with the object.

  
  

{{pageNumber,auto}}

\page

  

#### Hold Person

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 2nd Level

- **Range:** 180 ft

- **Duration:**  9 turns

- **Save:**  Per [MD]

___

The caster targets 1d4 living bipeds of human size or smaller, such as

goblins or dryads. The caster may also

target a single person, in which case the

saving throw(s) is made with a penalty of –2.

  
  



  
  



  
  


  
  



  
  

#### Locate Plants

___

- **Spell Level:**  Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  60 feet + 10 feet/[MD]

- **Duration:** 2 turn x [MD]

___

Within the spell’s range, the caster perceives the correct direction (as the crow flies) toward a particular kind of plant named in the casting of the spell.

  
  

#### Obscuring Mist

___

- **Spell Level:**  Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  20 feet

- **Duration:** 1 turn x [MD]

___

A misty vapor seethes outward from the casting point, billowing forth to fill a radius of 20 feet + 10 feet/[MD] of the caster.

  

{{pageNumber,auto}}

\page

  



  

#### Produce Flame

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:** Palm of hand

- **Duration:** 2 turns/[MD]

___

Flame ignites from nowhere in the palm of the caster’s hand, causing no damage to the caster, but otherwise is as hot as natural fire. It can be used while held, or thrown to a distance of 30 feet to ignite flammable materials. For so long as the sprit-fire is in the caster’s hand, it can be extinguished immediately whenever the caster wishes it gone.

  

\column

  

#### Pyrotechnics

___

- **Spell Level:** Magic-User, 2nd; Shaman, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  240 ft

- **Duration:** [sum MD], see description

___

The pyrotechnics spell requires an

existing fire source (which may be anywhere in the spell’s

range) and may be used to produce two entirely different effects (players may propose other effects):

- **Fireworks:** The flashing display will temporarily blind (for [sum MD] rounds) all creatures

in the area of effect and 120 ft beyond— provided that the

display is not obstructed from view. The fireworks persist for at least 1 round/level.

- **Billowing Smoke:** If the spell is used to produce smoke, a billowing cloud

will emanate from the fire source, obscuring vision beyond 20 ft. The GM decides exactly how much smoke is produced and if there are any other effects, but there will be at least 8000 cubic feet (roughly 20 x 20

x 20 feet). The smoke persists for at least [sum MD] turns.

  

#### Resist Fire

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 2nd Level; Shaman, 1st Level

- **Range:**  30 ft

- **Duration:** [sum MD] turns

___

A single creature is bestowed with supernatural resistance to fire. They are unharmed by non-magical heat or fire and gain a +2 bonus to saving throws versus fire-based effects. If they do take fire-based damage, it is halved.

  
  

#### Silence 15-ft Radius

___

- **Spell Level:**   Cleric, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  180 ft

- **Duration:** 12 turns

___

Magical silence falls in an area with a 15-

foot radius around the targeted creature

or object, and moves with it. Nothing from

this area, no matter how loud, can be heard

outside the radius.

  

{{pageNumber,auto}}

\page

  

#### Speak with Animals

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 2nd Level; Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  Caster

- **Duration:** 6 turns

___

The caster can speak with normal animals.

There is a good chance that the animals

provide reasonable assistance if requested,

and they will not attack — unless the caster

uses the spell to say something particularly

offensive.

  
  

#### Strength

___

- **Spell Level:**   Magic-User, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  Touch

- **Duration:** 1 hour/[MD]

___

For the duration of the spell, a Fighter-type creature gains +1 to STR-based checks, +1 to hit, and +1 damage. Other classes get +1 STR-based checks and +1 to hit, but not the bonus damage.

  

\column

  

#### Warp Wood

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  60 feet

- **Duration:** Permanent

___

This spell warps, bends, and twists wood. The volume of about one 2-inch x 4-inch x 5-foot plank may be affected per [MD] — the volume of a spear or several arrows. However, keep in mind that springing a door open or causing a leak in a ship’s planking does not actually require much of the constituent wood to be warped.

  
  

#### Web

___

- **Spell Level:**   Magic-User, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  30 ft

- **Duration:** 8 hours

___

Fibrous, sticky webs fill [MD] x 10' cube(s) of area. No creature affected can cast spells or attack. It is extremely difficult to get through the mass of strands. The strands of a web spell are very flammable.

If they are ignited, fire will flash through the entire web,

dealing 2d4 points of damage to all creatures within and

burning away the webs. The time to break free depends on size and strength. Some examples:

- Typical Medium Creature: 1d4+1 turns

- Magically-augmented Medium Creature, Most Large Creatures: 2 turns

- Giant-range Str, Dragons: 2 rounds

- Big Ass Dragons: 1 round

  

#### Wizard Lock

___

- **Spell Level:**   Magic-User, 2nd Level

- **Range:**  Close

- **Duration:**  Permanent until dispelled

___

As with a hold portal spell, wizard lock

holds a door closed, but it is permanent

until dispelled. Creatures with magic resistance can shatter the spell without effort.

Any Magic-User at least three levels higher

than the caster can open the portal, and a

knock spell will open it as well, although the

spell is not permanently destroyed in these

cases.

  

{{pageNumber,auto}}

\page

  

### Level 3

  

#### Battering Wind

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 3rd Level

- **Range:**   60 feet + 10 feet x [dice]

- **Duration:** Immediate

- **Save:** Yes

___

Target saves or is thrown back 10’ per [dice]. You can affect 1 target per [die], so long as they’re fairly close together.

  

#### Call Lightning

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  120 feet

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

Can only be cast if there are clouds overhead. A bolt of lightning leaps from heaven and strikes the target, dealing [sum MD] lightning damage. They take double damage if wearing metal armour.

  
  

#### Cure Blindness

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  Touch

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

This powerful spell allows the cleric permanently to remove virtually all forms of blindness.

  

#### Cure Disease

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  Touch

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

Cures the spell’s recipient of any diseases, including magically-inflicted ones.

  

\column

  

#### Hold Animal

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  120 feet

- **Duration:** 1 hour

- **Save:**  Yes, see description

___

The caster targets no more than four normal or giant animals, with total hit dice equal to or less than those of the caster + [MD]. These animals are completely immobilized (saving throw applies). If the caster targets a single creature, the saving throw is made with a penalty of -2.

  

#### Neutralize Poison

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  Touch

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

Cures the spell's recipient of any poisons or venoms. This spell can bring a poisoned creature back from death's door ("Mostly Dead") if cast within [caster level] + [MD sum] number turns of the poisoning. The spell's recipient is brought back to 1 HP and the poison is cleared from their system.

This spell can also be cast on poisoned items.

  

#### Vomit Twin

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, 3rd Level

- **Range:** Adjacent space

- **Duration:** 1 + [MD] rounds

___

You vomit up an oozy duplicate of yourself. The vomitous clone has your STR and DEX, a gross club (1d4), and slimy skin that counts as +1 AC. Every time you move, you can choose to either have the ooze-twin move with you, or not. Every time you attack, you can choose to either have your barf-bud attack, or not.  At any time during the duration, you can instantly switch places with the twin. The twin is destroyed if it takes [sum MD] damage.

  

{{pageNumber,auto}}

\page

  

#### Remove Curse

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 3rd Level

- **Range:**  Touch

- **Duration:** Immediate

___

This spell removes one curse from a person or object.

  

#### Speak With Dead

___

- **Spell Level:** Cleric, 3rd Level

- **Range:** Touch

- **Duration:** 3 questions

___

The caster can ask three questions of a corpse, and it will answer, although the answers might be cryptic. It takes a lot of spiritual power to command answers of long-dead corpses. For this spell, you must declare how many [MD] to use as usual, but they are rolled in sequence. If rolling one [MD], the body can have been dead that many days. The second [MD] is for months. The third [MD] is for years, and the fourth [MD] for centuries.

  

#### Water Breathing

___

- **Spell Level:** Shaman, Magic-User; 3rd Level

- **Range:** 30 feet

- **Duration:** 1 + [MD] hours

___

The recipient of the spell is able to breathe underwater until the spell’s duration expires.
